Add edit suggestions + NL translation (#187)
techworkersco/twc-site-nl: content/resources/long-term-illness/index.en.md

---

> title: "Long-term illness in the Netherlands"

Reviewer: I was second guessing myself the whole time about whether long-term was hyphenated or not. There will be a lot of this through the whole doc 😅

This resource discusses the sections in the *Ziektewet* that cover long-term illness. It addresses what counts as long-term illness, what your rights and obligations are when you've been ill for a while, and provides answers to some frequently asked questions. 

Any steps taken while you're ill should always focus on supporting your health. Understanding your rights, obligations, and processes for long-term illness is key for your future.

{{< we-are-not-lawyers >}}

## A personal note

Are you currently not feeling your 100% normal self? Then go see your general practitioner (GP, *huisarts*). This resource will be here when you get back. Look after your own health first before worrying about admin and processes.

Are you feeling overwhelmed by the amount of information in this resource? Then you're a normal human being. There's a lot to digest here, so take your time. If you need support, reach out to [hey@techwerkers.nl](mailto:hey@techwerkers.nl) and a fellow worker will try to point you in the right direction.

## Terminology

| Term | Other names | Description | 
| --- | --- | --- |

> | *Arbo-arts* | Occupational health physician | The term '*arbo-arts*' is sometimes mistakenly used to refer to a *bedrijfsarts* (company doctor). An *arbo-arts* isn't a company doctor, but a health care professional that can work under the supervision of a company doctor. Occupational health physicians aren't allowed to perform independent medical assessments. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| *Arbo-arts* | Occupational health physician | The term '*arbo-arts*' is sometimes mistakenly used to refer to a *bedrijfsarts* (company doctor). An *arbo-arts* is a health care professional that can work under the supervision of a company doctor. They aren't allowed to perform independent medical assessments. |
```

Removed `An *arbo-arts* isn't a company doctor,` since it is already said in "mistakenly" ?

Removed repetition in favor of  "they" since it's contextually correct.

Note: The whole doc doesn't mention Arboarts of occupational health physician anywhere from memory. The reason for it's inclusion is to demystify it because it shows up in online searches every now and then. I wonder if we should just drop it in general 🤷

Author: Thanks! I think it's probably fine to keep *arboarts* in the terminology, even if it doesn't get discussed elsewhere in the doc (haven't checked) as it's a term people might run into. 

(Side note: Could probably be helpful to make a self-standing glossary somewhere on the website with labour law relevant terms :smile: I seem to recall there even is a draft of that somewhere? will look that up at some point)

| *Arbodienst* | Working conditions service <br/> Health and safety service | A broad term for a collection of services that a company may provide under the heading of health and wellness, often with the thought of reducing operational risks. Although not mandatory, many large companies hire external providers for managing their *arbodienst*. Many *arbodienst* companies provide not only a *bedrijfsarts* but also others services, such as additional counseling services, wellness plans, risk management, and the like. If your company wants to change its *arbodienst* provider, and if you have a works council, then your works council must be asked for consent on any such change. |

> | *Bedrijfsarts* | Company doctor | A health care professional paid by the employer who evaluates a worker's -- their patient's -- abilities to perform their regular duties, and reports that evaluation back to the company in conjunction with the patient. In theory, a company doctor's focus should be on their patient's health. A company doctor is obliged to keep your medical information private, and not share it with the company that pays for their services. Company doctors are chosen by the company and, if there's a works council, the company's works council. |

Reviewer: I think we need to finesse this one a bit more. We should keep out "In theory" and be factual to the role they perform etc.

From the research I did, the bedrijfsarts is just as much of a doctor as the normal huisarts, however they are more occupationally focused (e.g. how can they get their patient safely back into the workforce). It's possible that a patient may never actually go to their normal GP, and may actually be doing more of their primary care through the bedrijfsarts.

After research, the core bullet points are essentially:
- They are a health care provider
- Their job is to provide health care to their patient - in the same way a huisarts is supposed to too.
- They are bound to the same patient/provider confidentiality agreements of any health care provider
- They are paid for by the company. A patient has a right to a second opinion
- They are not directly responsible for saying whether someone can or cannot work
- They do have some responsibility in evaluating and reporting [their advice/opinion] on someones abilities to perform their regular duties.

```suggestion
| *Bedrijfsarts* | Company doctor | A primary care doctor, paid by the employer who works in conjunction with a worker -- their patient. A company doctors focus is on their patients health, and is obliged to keep the workers medical information private, and not share it with the company that pays for their services. The company doctor evaluates and reports back an advice to the company on their patients capabilities to perform their regular duties. Company doctors are chosen by the company and, if there's a works council, the company's works council. |
```

Key points is that they are a primary care professional, and that their report is an advice document (not authoritative).

| Employee, patient | Individual | This resource uses the term 'employee' when referring to contracts or the employee-employer relationship. 'Patient' will be used in conjunction with healthcare related information. |
| Employer, company | | The registered company with which the employee has a signed contract to perform their work duties |

> | *Huisarts* | General Practitioner (GP) <br/> Home doctor | A healthcare professional who's often the first point of contact when someone's ill and requires medical support. A GP can be involved in diagnosing and treating medical conditions, as well as referring to specialists for further support and treatment -- this can include physical (such as orthopedic) and mental (such as therapy) treatments. GPs must keep their patient's medical information private, though they can share it with specialists with the patient's consent. In the Netherlands people can choose their own GP. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| *Huisarts* | General Practitioner (GP) <br/> Home doctor | A primary care doctor who's often the first point of contact when someone's ill and requires medical support. A GP can be involved in diagnosing and treating medical conditions, as well as referring to specialists for further support and treatment -- this can include physical (such as orthopedic) and mental (such as therapy) treatments. GPs must keep their patient's medical information private, though they can share it with third parties with the patient's consent. In the Netherlands people can choose their own GP. |
```

`Third parties` <-- The reason, there might be some evidence needed at the end of the second year from the GP, and that might need to be delivered to UWV, not to a specialist. In theory any information can be requested to be shared from a patients behalf if they so choose.

| Illness | Sickness, sick | Anything that prevents someone from performing their regular duties |

> | Illness period | | A period of time that spans from the first day that someone's declared ill to their last day of illness. An illness period can include multiple different illnesses, for example burnout and a broken leg. |

Reviewer: I think we need to avoid using the term burnout - specifically because it is not a medical diagnosis.

```suggestion
| Illness period | | A period of time that spans from the first day that someone's declared ill to their last day of illness. An illness period can include multiple different illnesses, for example the flu and then a broken leg. |
```

> | Illness period, first day of | | <p>The first day that the employee was unable to perform their regular duties. ([Burgerlijk Wetboek 7:629 lid 1](http://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBR0005290&amp;boek=7&amp;titeldeel=10&amp;afdeling=2&amp;artikel=629&amp;lid=1)) <br/> ℹ️ <b>Note:</b> Illness during vacation should be transferred to sick leave, and as such the first day of illness might be whilst someone is on vacation.</p> |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Illness period, first day of | | <p>The first day that the employee was unable to perform their regular duties. ([Burgerlijk Wetboek 7:629 lid 1](http://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBR0005290&amp;boek=7&amp;titeldeel=10&amp;afdeling=2&amp;artikel=629&amp;lid=1)) <br/> ℹ️ <strong>Note:</strong> Illness during vacation should be transferred to sick leave, and as such the first day of illness might be whilst someone is on vacation.</p> |
```

> | Illness period, last day of | | The day at which an employee who has registered sick has worked at 100% of their regular duties for 4 weeks without interruption. ([Burgerlijk Wetboek 7:629 lid 10](http://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBR0005290&amp;boek=7&amp;titeldeel=10&amp;afdeling=2&amp;artikel=629&amp;lid=10)) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Illness period, last day of | | The day at which an employee who was previously registered sick has worked at 100% of their regular duties for 4 weeks without interruption. ([Burgerlijk Wetboek 7:629 lid 10](http://wetten.overheid.nl/jci1.3:c:BWBR0005290&amp;boek=7&amp;titeldeel=10&amp;afdeling=2&amp;artikel=629&amp;lid=10)) |
```

nit?

| Medical information | Patient dossier <br/> Private medical information <br/> Medical details | Medical information includes, among other things:<ul><li>Diagnosis</li><li>Treatments or therapies and the contents thereof</li><li>Details of conversations at medical appointments</li></ul>Anything you'd share in private with your doctor is very likely medical information. |
| Obligation | | Something that's required, whether you like it or not. For example, you're obliged to tell your employer you're calling in sick, unless it's physically impossible for you to do so. |

> | Occupational impairment | *Arbeidsongeschikt* | You have an occupational impairment if the prognosis of an illness is likely to result in a permanent reduction in a person's ability to perform 100% of their regular duties. In other words: illness without full recovery. Occupational impairment is usually measured in a percentage of the person's ability to perform their regular duties. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Occupational impairment | *Arbeidsongeschikt* | You have an occupational impairment if the prognosis of an illness results in a permanent reduction in a your ability to perform 100% of your regular duties. In other words: illness without full recovery. Occupational impairment is usually measured in a percentage of the person's inability to perform their regular duties. 40% occupationally impaired, implies you can work at 60% of your original capacity |
```

> | <a href="https://www.uwv.nl/nl/ziek/loondoorbetaling/plan-van-aanpak">Plan of action</a> | *Plan van aktie* | The plan agreed upon between you and your employer about your trajectory of reintegration. Basic principles: <ul><li>Work tasks should remain relevant to your original job description, unless you agree otherwise. For example, you can't be required to mop floors if that wasn't part of your job.</li><li>Your employer can't force you to undergo additional treatments, therapies, guidance or counseling</li></ul> Some employers can be pushy for dates about when you'll return to work. The reality is that health doesn't work that way. Take the plan of action one step at a time, and revise when needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| <a href="https://www.uwv.nl/nl/ziek/loondoorbetaling/plan-van-aanpak">Plan of action</a> | *Plan van aanpak* | The plan agreed upon between you and your employer about your trajectory of reintegration. Basic principles: <ul><li>Work tasks should remain relevant to your original job description, unless you agree otherwise. For example, you can't be required to mop floors if that wasn't part of your job.</li><li>Your employer can't force you to undergo additional treatments, therapies, guidance or counseling</li></ul> Some employers can be pushy for dates about when you'll return to work. The reality is that health doesn't work that way. Take the plan of action one step at a time, and revise when needed. |
```

UWV uses the term aanpak instead of aktie.

I think this also needs to be sharpened a bit. From research:
- Plan van aanpak is an agreement between employee and employer about the plan of action.
- It should [ideally] always be a stappenplan, and not a deadline driven goal document. e.g. Step A, then Step B, then Step C.
- If there is a target date for Step A, then [ideally] it's a goal, not a target
- Employers typically just want to know "When will this person be re-integrated". That's kinda not the point of it...
- The plan van aanpak is used as evidence in the later reviews, so it's important it documents the agreements etc.
- the other points about work tasks being relevant to the job description are correct
- The plan is generated with agreement by the employee and the employer from the outputs of the problem analysis (which is generated by the bedrijfsarts)

```suggestion
| <a href="https://www.uwv.nl/nl/ziek/loondoorbetaling/plan-van-aanpak">Plan of action</a> | *Plan van aanpak* | The plan is generated  and agreed upon between the employee and the employer based on outputs from the company doctor. It should contain a plan of action about the reintegration trajectory. Basic principles: <ul><li>Work tasks should remain relevant to your original job description. For example, you can't be required to mop floors if that wasn't part of your job.</li><li>It should ideally be a step for step plan for the re-integration with goal dates, not with target dates.</li><li>You may agree to additional company provided therapy, counciling, etc, but you are under no obligation to do so./li></ul>Some employers may be pushy for dates about when you'll return to work. The reality is that health doesn't work that way. Take the plan of action one step at a time, and revise with your employer when needed. |
```

| Recovered | | When a person who was declared as ill is now able to perform 100% of their regular duties, and has done so for at least 4 consecutive weeks. |
| Regular duties | Work duties <br/> Job tasks | The definition of the work in the employee's contract. What would be expected in a normal day of work, including the hours of work. 100% regular duties implies working at the contracted hours (for example 32 hours if that is stated in the contract). |
| UWV | *Uitvoeringsinstituut Werknemersverzekeringen* <br/> Employee Insurance Agency | The government department that is responsible for evaluating eligibility for, and eventually paying, a number of collectively provided benefits. UWV checks that companies follow the correct procedures when applying for benefits, and will hold companies accountable if processes aren't followed correctly. |

> | *Verzekeringarts* | Insurance doctor | This doctor works at the UWV and is responsible for evaluating how to patient has been handled during the long-term illness trajectory. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| *Verzekeringarts* | Insurance doctor | This doctor works at the UWV and is responsible for evaluating how the patient has been handled during the long-term illness trajectory. |
```

> | WIA benefit | *WIA-uitkering*, from *[Wet werk en inkomen naar arbeidsvermogen](https://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBR0019057/2026-01-01)*<br/> Sickness benefit | The WIA benefit is specifically for people who can't work due to occupational impairment. When a person is declared as occupationally impaired, they generally receive a portion (or all) of their future income from the WIA benefit. This benefit is paid from collective provisions, instead of through the employer. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| WIA benefit | *WIA-uitkering*, from *[Wet werk en inkomen naar arbeidsvermogen](https://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBR0019057/2026-01-01)*<br/> Sickness benefit | The WIA benefit is specifically for people are occupational impairment, fully or part thereof. When a person is declared as occupationally impaired, they generally receive a portion (or all) of their future income from the WIA benefit. This benefit is paid from collective provisions, instead of through the employer. |
```

Author: Gonna commit the suggestion but will then update to "... for people **who** are occupational**ly** impair**ed**, **either** fully or **partially**" for grammar (**bold** only to highlight the changes, won't add boldface to the entry).

| WW benefit | *WW-uitkering*, from *[Werkloosheidswet](https://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBR0004045/2026-01-01)* <br/> Unemployment benefit | The general unemployment benefit for individuals without paid work in the Netherlands. |

> | *Ziektewet* | Sickness benefit act | The law that encompasses what happens when someone is declared ill. This covers, amongst others, long-term illness. It provides protections for both businesses and individuals. |

Reviewer: Ah nice, Alphabetical, condensed into one. Makes sense like this!

## I'm not okay, what should I do?

As a human being writing this document: that honestly sucks. Let's figure this one out:

1. **Notify**: Before anything else, tell your manager you're calling in sick. Check your [company policy](#how-can-i-find-my-companys-sick-leave-policy) on how to do so. If your manager is unavailable and you can't find your company policy, check with a coworker. Make sure someone knows that you're not working.
2. **Get help**: Next, figure out what you need for yourself. Depending on the illness, you may want to reach out to your GP. For now, look after yourself.

Company expectations during first days of illness can vary. It's best practice clarify to your manager what they can expect from you over the coming days. 

Company policy may say that you need to contact someone who's actually contributed to your being unwell, for example a manager who's assaulted you. If that's the case, many companies have a trust person (*vertrouwenspersoon*) who you could contact. Alternatively, you could contact your manager's manager, or someone in human resources (HR).

> Note that, although uncommon in tech, Dutch law allows companies to withold pay during the first 2 days of sick leave -- sometimes called *[wachtdagen](https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/onderwerpen/ziekteverzuim-van-het-werk/vraag-en-antwoord/hoe-lang-krijg-ik-loon-doorbetaald-als-ik-ziek-ben)*. If so, this should be stated in the company policy. 

Reviewer: So, the "company policy" is often in a "personeelshandboek". Companies are not required to have one, but apparently it's pretty common in many company. I think this translates into "Employee handbook".

https://www.kvk.nl/personeel/wat-is-een-personeelshandboek-en-wat-staat-er-in/

Thoughts on use this instead of "company policy" (I know I used it in a number of places 😅)

Author: Yeah that's great! I'll go through the text and update. Will maybe also add an entry to the terminology list to clarify this point

Author: Hmm upon consideration, I'm thinking that 'company policy' might actually be a bit more of a neutral reference to any document that contains the relevant policy info? whether it's called 'employee handbook' or something else

So in that light I'd like to suggest:
- Add an entry for employee handbook/company policy/personeelshandboek in the terminology list to clarify that it might be known by different names.
- But then in the body of the text leave references to 'company policy'.

I'll add such an entry if that's all right

Reviewer: Sounds good to me!

## What is long-term illness?

> <!-- TODO: find definition wetboek on 4 weeks period? -->

Reviewer: This is where I got it from: https://www.fnv.nl/werk-inkomen/ziekte-re-integratie/langdurig-ziek

But I'm not sure about the wetboek link. That one is a lot harder to find. I'm beginning to think there is no legal definition of someone being "long-term sick", and that it's just important that around week 4 that they're taking it seriously, because a bedrijfsart should be giving their problem analysis by week 6 already 🤷

Author: Yeah I can't find any law text on it either so far, but every single source I've found confirms 4 weeks so let's just assume that's fact

## Your rights and obligations during long-term illness

During long-term illness, specific events and actions must take place at specific times. Some of these obligations are on the employee, and some on the employer. Some are needed for you to be able apply for [WIA benefit](#terminology).

### Rights

<!-- TODO: Some citations still to be added -->

As an employee, you have at least the following general rights (non-exhaustive):

- Right to manage their own health ({cite})
- Right to choose their own healthcare providers ({cite})
- Right to a second opinion from an alternative company doctor, at the company's expense

### Obligations

As an employee, you have at least the following general obligations (non-exhaustive):

- Work with the company doctor to develop a reintegration plan
- Regularly meet with the employer, as per the reintegration plan
- Stick to any agreements made with the employer, usually as stated in the reintegration plan
- Work with the company doctor if any agreements with the employer can't be met or are unachievable. 
    - For example, if treatment isn't working as expected, the number of hours a week you work may have to be adjusted.

> - Participate in any required events, such as the [Year 1](#year-1) review or the End evaluation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Work with your employer on the Plan of Action in conjunction with advice from the company doctor
- Regularly meet with the employer, as per the plan of action
- Stick to any agreements made with the employer, usually as stated in the plan of action
- Work with the company doctor if any agreements with the employer can't be met or are unachievable. 
    - For example, if treatment isn't working as expected, the number of hours a week you work may have to be adjusted down.
- Participate in any required events, such as the [Year 1](#year-1) review or the End evaluation.
```

The company doctor provides advice only. They may help provide a reintegration plan (or even propose a plan of action), however it is not their responsibility.

I think everyone calls it a reintegration plan, but the UWV calls it the plan van aanpak, so 🤷

Author: OK fair. I'll add 'reintegration plan' in the first time the plan of action is mentioned here, and let's go with 'plan of action' following that

## The role of company doctors

> At least in theory, a company doctor should function like any other doctor. They have a medical background, and their stated goal is for you to get well, so that you're able to resume your regular work activities. Company doctors should observe strict patient-doctor confidentiality and shouldn't share medical information with the employer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A company doctor should function like any other doctor. They have a medical background, and their stated goal is for you to get well, so that you're able to resume your regular work activities. Company doctors should observe strict patient-doctor confidentiality and shouldn't share medical information with the employer.
```

I think we should remove uncertainty, even if sometimes company doctors are not acting in best interests etc. We can cover that uncertainty in "disputes" etc.

> The difference is with your own GP is, of course, that the company doctor is paid by your employer. In that light, it's up to you how much information you choose to share with your company doctor.

Reviewer: Same applies here. I think it's important to call out "where the money flows", but we can be careful in the sense of "Just because [they're paid by your boss], doesn't mean [they have to f--k your life up]".

> The core differences between your GP and your company doctor is that your GP is for general health and chosen by you, whereas the company doctor is directed towards their patients occupation and is chosen and paid for by your employer.

Talking with Tara, apparently you're more likely to get some health care advice regarding work life balance from your company doctor than you are from your GP. e.g. their domain is more tightly coupled with occupation. Tara has also generally mentioned to me that you get better results when treating your company doctor like an actual doctor, rather than an adversary.

I'm not sure we should really offer any specific advice to share/withhold information in the resource itself. Maybe in the presentation since it's easier to articulate?

Author: That's fine, I'll rephrase to soften it a bit :ok_hand:

Author: How about the following:

> A company doctor a primary care doctor paid by the employer. Their professional goal is for you to get well, so that you're able to resume your regular work activities. Company doctors should observe strict patient-doctor confidentiality and shouldn't share medical information with the employer.

I've updated the paragraph to the above, but let me know if you'd prefer some additional tweaks

Reviewer: Noiiiccceeeee. A++, happy with that

The company doctor is allowed to [share non-medical information with your employer](https://www.arboned.nl/nieuws/wat-zijn-de-taken-van-een-bedrijfsarts), concerning:

- Your capabilities and limitations, and the extent to which you're able to work

> - How long they expect you to be absent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- An indication as to how long they expect you to be absent
```

?

- Any advice regarding adjustments, work arrangements, or interventions that the employer must implement for you to be able to reintegrate

For example, a company doctor may indicate to an employer:

<!-- Made these somewhat more concrete -->

- 'The patient is unable to work at this time. The next evaluation is on 25 June.'
- 'The patient is undergoing a form of treatment which requires them to be absent from work for several hours, around 2-3 times a week.'
- 'The patient is able to reintegrate doing light, desk-based work for 10 hours a week.'
- 'The patient is expected to be able to reintegrate over a period of 9 weeks. This is subject to change.'

> - 'The patient is expected not to be able to reintegrate at this time.'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 'It is unadvised for the patient to be working at this time. The next evaluation is on 25 June.'
- 'The patient is undergoing a form of treatment which requires them to be absent from work for several hours, around 2-3 times a week.'
- 'It is advised that the patient reintegrates by doing light, desk-based work for 10 hours a week.'
- 'The patient is expected to be able to reintegrate over a period of 9 weeks. This is subject to change.'
- 'The patient should not be expected to reintegrate at this time.'
```

> Again, the company doctor **isn't allowed** to share your medical information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Again, the company doctor **isn't allowed** to share your medical information without your consent.
```

## Who's allowed to know my medical information?

The *Autoriteit Persoonsgegevens* (Dutch authority on the use of Personally Identifying Information, or PII) [states on medical information](https://www.autoriteitpersoonsgegevens.nl/themas/gezondheid/gezondheidsgegevens-in-een-dossier/toegang-tot-het-dossier-met-gezondheidsgegevens):

> … no information from the medical file may be shared with others outside the practice or institution without the patient's or client's consent.

> There are strict penalties in the Netherlands for accessing or sharing personal information without consent, a process that's guarded by the *Autoriteit Persoongegevens*.

Reviewer: I see this information was broken up into the role of company doctors etc.

Some stuff from the research:

- The AVG posts information about data leaks. I couldn't find any data points of data leaks with regards to medical professionals, which either means it doesn't happen, or it's not reported
- Leaking medical information = losing your medical license from what I could see. It's a very big no no, and I got the feeling that this is very well known how sensitive it is. e.g. The average person should be able to trust the company doctor as much as they trust their GP.
- There will always be bad apples, however company doctors do have a specialization for occupational based health care, so on the aggregate, sharing relevant information with them is good. (There will always be stories contradicting this of course...).

And the above is also backed up by Tara too. The initial paranoia I had for bedrijfsarts is subdued, because i know the penalty is career threatening etc

It feels like we're missing parts here about "There is no obligation to share information with the company doctor, however they are bound by patient-doctor privilege, and providing them with information may improve their ability to treat you" ? or something?

Author: Yes good one, I'll add that point :ok_hand:

Author: Updated with:

> You're also under no obligation to share information with the company doctor. That said, providing your company doctor with relevant information may improve their ability to treat you. And like any other health care provider, company doctors are just as much required to keep your information confidential or they may face professional penalties.

| <b>Week 52+</b><br />Salary reduction likely | Dutch law requires companies in the Netherlands to pay at minimum 70% of your salary for the whole 2-year period of long-term illness. That said, it's common for companies to pay 100% of your salary for most if not all of the first year, and then reduce that to 70% from the start of year 2. (They're also allowed to pay 100% for the whole 2 years.) Check your company policy for details. | Employer |

#### Additional company benefits

Why might a company offer additional training, therapy, or other treatments when you're ill? Two core reasons:

- They are genuinely nice people at the company who care about your health
- There's a salary-sized fiscal incentive, as the company is required to pay your wages while you're away on sick leave

⚠️ **Important:** That your company pays for any additional resources does *not* mean they're entitled to your medical information. To be explicit: if your company is paying for a psychologist, they're *in no way* entitled to information about any of the conversations you had. That would be a severe breach of privacy, professional confidentiality, and data protection duties.

### Year 2

> <!-- Check: Employer is listed as participant in weeks 86-93 but it's not stated what they do -->

Reviewer: TBH, from the research it's "compiling the documents" and specifically providing evidence

The plan of action is both employee and employer related. The employer needs to show evidence of willingness to re-integrate someone back into the work place.

In some respectss, the UWV doesn't actually want to just give out the WIA benefit willy nilly. There's a certain budget for the UWV, and they have to keep in line with that etc. So the employer needs to show some  effort

An example: Imagine the employer doesn't show up to the 6 weekly check-ins. "Employee sick, meh, wait till the UWV picks it up" kind of mentality. The employer wasn't encouraging the individual or finding alternative work, and was ready to just offload the responsibility in that case. UWV says "Go away, pay this person a salary for another year, and don't be a dick"... in short.

So they have work to do, but in the sense of "should we document it" 🤷. IMO it's an employers problem to figure that out.

> <!-- Check weeks 86-93: Must your medical info be shared with UWV? -->

Reviewer: The medical dossier is collated by the company doctor. The submission of the information is done directly by the employee to the UWV. The employer in theory never sees these documents. The UWV uses this information with the verzekeringarts to make a decision as to how much the person is arbeidongeschickt.

So, yes, medical information is shared here.

Author: OK good thanks for clarifying! Will remove the comment

> <!-- Check: Employer is listed as participant in week 93, what do they do? -->

Reviewer: Employee submits their application form things, their evidence etc.
Employer submits their application form (e.g. their permit to fire the person) with their evidence that "they did enough".

Same with the above point, there is some responsibility on the employer, but I didn't write it out explictly.

Author: Got it! I'd suggest the following:

- Week 86-93: Remove mention of employer; the employer will also be preparing their application in the background, but it's not something the worker needs to worry about, so I'd say need not be included here
- Week 93: Mention that this is time when employer submits their application + evidence

I've updated the text like that, if you'd like any further changes feel free to edit

Reviewer: Yeah, I think that should be fine. I think the employee may expect some questions coming from the employer during that week, but in general it shouldn't be unexpected to be asked for information by your employer in this regard or something.

| Timeline | Description | Responsibility of |
| --- | --- | --- |

> | <b>From week 8</b>, continued every 6 weeks at a minimum</br> Evaluation meetings | Meetings to evaluate how your reintegration is going in light of the plan of action continue. The content of the discussions may change though in year 2. If it's unlikely that you'll return to your role, then alternatives (such as [eerste spoor](#eerste-spoor-first-track) or [tweede spoor](#tweede-spoor-second-track)) may be discussed and your plan of action might get adjusted. | Employee + Employer |

Reviewer: This is likely fine as it is, but this was written before I did the eerste/tweede spoor things.

Re-integrating into your current role OR another role in the same business is eerste spoor.
Re-integrating into another company is tweede spoor.

So it's not "incorrect" that not reintegrating into your current role can be in eerste spoor still, however in a different role in the same company. Is that really worth calling out? meh, IMO no, but just adding incase you think it's helpful?

Author: Ah yes good one, I'll rephrase to make it more precise :+1:

## Exiting long-term illness

You can exit the long-term illness trajectory in various ways:

* Reintegration ...
  * ... [into your current company (*Eerste spoor*)](#eerste-spoor-reintegrate-into-current-company) 
  * ... [into a different company (*Tweede spoor*)](#tweede-spoor-reintegrate-into-a-different-company)
* [Employer terminates the contract](#employer-terminates-the-contract)
* [Resigning? Generally not advised](#resigning-dont-do-it-in-most-cases)

The following sections give more information on each of these options.

There's no 'correct' way to exit a long-term illness trajectory. Which path you take depends on many factors, and should always focus on what's best for you given your personal circumstances.

### Reintegration

Reintegration involves going back to formal, paid work in some form or other, and in some capacity or other---whether that's in your current role, a different role, at your current company or a different one.

Your reintegration strategy should be part of the plan to action [LINK]. You're considered as having successfully reintegrated when you:

> 1. Are working your agreed contracted hours

Reviewer: One small extra note about this one, and it's so hard to find a place for it to live...

The UWV generally doesn't approve the WIA for people that are <35% arbeidsongeschikt. e.g. Imagine you've had a series of concussions, and your mental capacity is just 80% of what it used to be. That means you're only 20% arbeidsongeschickt.

So, you have an accident, you're  100% at home recovering for 3 months, you're re-integrating, moving from 10%, to 30%, to 60%, and eventually at 80% but it's the 2 year mark. Your options:
1. UWV grants permit for your contract to end
2. You accept a 80% contact, because you're clearly able to work at 80% anyway (and yes, you take the 20% pay cut).

So....  "Are working your agreed contracted hours"... that could mean your "new" contracted hours too...

Edit: Oh, actually, this is somewhat covered later in "reintegrating at reduced capacity"

Author: Yeah it's tricky, was trying out a couple of things. Have now tried to add it as a note to the WIA entry in the terminology:

>  Note that the UWV often rejects applications for WIA benefits from people who are still able to work at 65% or more of their previous capacity (less than 35% occupationally impaired).

Does that work?

Reviewer: Yeah that should be fine. I mean it's further explained in a later paragraph too so I think all bases are covered

2. Are performing your regular duties, or agreed adjusted duties
3. Have been doing (1) and (2) for 4 consecutive weeks

#### *Eerste spoor*: Reintegrate into current company

> <!-- Check: Should the below read 'non-permanent' disability? Or is it the case that Eerste spoor generally involves permanent disability? And would 'disability' be the best general label or maybe 'impairment'? -->

Reviewer: Eerste spoor is purely "re-integrating to the same company where you have your current contract"

The flavours of eerste spoor may or may not include a permanent injury. I'll adjust the below

Author: Cool I've removed the comments and the reference that the disability must be permanent. Note: also removed the reference to it having to be "non-role impacting", as the examples also include cases where people reintegrate into a different role --- in which case "non-role impacting" could be confusing

Reviewer: Yeah noiceeeeee. LGTM

<!-- Suggest to remove the reference to this being the most common one, as people ending up in one of the other paths may then get the feeling that they're abnormal or something :) -->

> The *Eerste spoor* (roughly, 'first track') way of exiting a long-term illness trajectory involves reintegrating into the company where you're currently working. *Eerste spoor* generally assumes a non-terminal, non-role impacting, permanent disability. It can include any of the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *Eerste spoor* (roughly, 'first track') way of exiting a long-term illness trajectory involves reintegrating into the company where you're currently working. Many people re-integrate via *Eerste spoor* though means of a non-terminal, non-role impacting illness. Examples of re-integrating through Eerste spoor are as follows:
```

or even just:

```suggestion
The *Eerste spoor* (roughly, 'first track') way of exiting a long-term illness trajectory involves reintegrating into the company where you're currently working. Examples of re-integrating through Eerste spoor are as follows:
```

Note: non-exhaustive list.

Author: Ah I already changed something here so can't commit the suggestion anymore -- will update separately to use: 

> Examples of re-integrating through *eerste spoor* include:

#### *Tweede spoor*: Reintegrate into a different company

The *[Tweede spoor](https://www.fnv.nl/werk-inkomen/ziekte-re-integratie/re-integratie/2e-spoor)* (second track) involves reintegrating into a different company. Your contract with the current company would end, and a new one at another company begins.

Is this strange? It can actually make a lot of sense in certain situations. For example:

- You work in a call centre. Your long-term illness is related to the subject matter of the calls, which induces anxiety and make you relive past trauma.
- You're reintegrating, but it's clear that the work environment isn't conducive to your recovery.
- In consultation with the company doctor, you start looking at job postings for call centre work at other companies where the subject matter doesn't hamper your recovery.

If a suitable position is found, then the *tweede spoor* has benefits to all the parties:

> <!-- Check: Is it known what benefits the receiving company gets? Is this tax breaks, direct payments, something else? -->

Reviewer: Yep! https://pulsinzetbaarheid.nl/artikelen/aannemen-spoor-2-traject/

> Neemt u een medewerker na afloop van 2 jaar ziekte officieel bij u in dienst? Dan kunt u als werkgever mogelijk gebruikmaken van interessante regelingen via de overheid. De overheid stimuleert werkgevers namelijk op allerlei manieren om mensen met een arbeidsbeperking in dienst te nemen. U kunt hierbij denken aan een no-risk polis of loonkostenvoordelen.

Put really blunt about the "UWV doesn't want to pay the WIA" comment from earlier... it is cheaper for the UWV to relocate you and give that new company tax breaks, than it is to pay your salary until pension 😅 

Some more information here: https://www.uwv.nl/nl/ziek/re-integratie/spoor-1-2-andere-functie

The no-risk  policy: https://www.uwv.nl/nl/no-riskpolis. In short, the UWV says "Don't worry bud, we got you if this person stays ill".

Author: Thanks! made tiny rephrasing to reflect that, but as it's on the company I guess no need to go into deep detail

However, there's no guarantee that this option will be available in all cases. While the company must facilitate your reintegration, they may try to argue that they can't have someone working at reduced hours.

For example: You're reintegrating and are currently at 50% of your original capacity. The company doctor expects that you might be able to increase this to 60%. The company, however, argues that they need someone at 80% capacity, otherwise it'll negatively impact their business. In this case, the UWV decides what happens to your contract.

### Employer terminates the contract

If you fulfill your obligations as a worker who's long-term ill (see: [Timeline](#timeline)), it's pretty much impossible for your employer to unilaterally end your contract during the first 2 years illness. 

Your employer can only unilaterally end your contract during long-term illness if the UWV gives them permission to do so. But the UWV has strict rules on when it'll give such permission, and generally won't do so during the first two year of reintegration.

> The only exception to this is when you apply for, and get, early WIA benefit.

Reviewer: This was something really hard to find out more information about. I am somewhat convinced it's actually two separate applications, and that approval or declining of WIA doesn't immediately link to contract temrination.

```suggestion
The only exception to this is at the end of the long-term illness trajectory where the employer applies for a permit to unilaterally end the contract.
```

At the end of the 2 years, two applications made to the UWV:

- You apply for the WIA Benefit
- The employer applies for a permit to end the contract unilaterally

The UWV has the last say on whether the employer can end your contract or not.

If the UWV approved the employer's request (though see here for [some reasons they might not](#reasons-why-the-uwv-might-reject-the-employers-request)) and your WIA benefit application, then you'll now get paid monthly by the UWV.

ℹ️ **Note**: You don't *resign* at the end of the two-year process. Instead, assuming you applied and are eligible, you'll transfer to receiving the WIA or WW benefits. So never resign if anyone in the company asks or pressures you to do so!

> ⚠️ **Important**: Many work visas, such as the *kennismigrant* (knowledge migrant) visa, require you to be formally employed. When your contract ends, then you're no longer formally employed. (The WIA benefit is not seen as employment.) And hence you're no longer meeting your work visa requirements. Without a valid visa, you may need to leave the country after two years of long-term illness.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
⚠️ **Important**: Many work visas, such as the *kennismigrant* (knowledge migrant, highly-skilled migrant) visa, require you to be formally employed. When your contract ends, then you're no longer formally employed. The WIA benefit is not seen as employment. Hence, you're no longer meeting your work visa requirements. Without a valid visa, you may need to leave the country after two years of long-term illness.
```

### Resigning? Don't do it! (in most cases)

Your work environment itself may be anxiety-inducing and hampering your recovery. On top of that, the long-term illness reintegration process can be bureaucratic, and at times stressful. Especially if you're not sure if obligations are being followed correctly. (This happens more often than it should.)

As a result, some people decide it's just not worth the hassle to try to reintegrate. They want to cut the process short and resign.

_**Think very carefully if you're planning to resign!**_

> If you resign, then you may become ineligible for the most important benefits available in the Netherlands for people who experience long-term illness or unemployment. Benefits that you'd be fully entitled to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you resign, then you may become ineligible for the most important benefits available in the Netherlands for people who experience long-term illness or unemployment. Benefits that you'd be fully entitled to otherwise.
```

Here's why. 

The WW and WIA benefits are designed to cover situations where you're unable to work due to factors outside of your control. However, when you resign from a job, authorities in the Netherlands will frame that as you being *able* to work, but simply *choosing* not to do so. Choosing not to work is within your control. Hence, in the worst case scenario, resigning may leave you ineligible for the WIA or WW benefits that you'd normally be entitled to.

> Of course whether you resign or not is still a personal choice. There's always a choice. Decide what's best for you, and ideally discuss your choices with someone you trust and a healthcare provider.

Reviewer: TODO

Reviewer: I have no idea what I meant here by TODO :sweat_smile:. Resolving for now

## FAQ

### How can I find my company's sick leave policy? 

Not all companies have a published policy, however if there is one, it should always be accessible on some intranet or document archive. If all else fails:

- Ask a coworker
- Ask someone in HR
- Ask your manager

### Will people think I'm just on a paid vacation? 

> People might, but they'd be wrong. You're entitled to time off to recover when you need it -- as is anyone else who's long-term ill. Let people talk, and look after yourself.

Reviewer: I feel like this could be more aggressive about the facts. I've had a number of discussions from people on long-term illness that find it hard for two main reasons.

- People make jokes about vacations
- Guilt of putting their team members in a hard spot and/or being a burden.

Also, I fear that using "entitled" might be give off the wrong vibe considering safety net vs. bucket approaches. I'll come back with some suggestions though.

Author: I'll give it a try to rephrase :ok_hand:

Author: OK I've rephrased it to the following, but am not sure if this runs a bit off topic?

> People might, but they'd be wrong. If you're ill and can't work, then you need time  to recover---as would anyone else in those circumstances. Dutch law protects workers from employer retaliation during long-term illness, so as long as you fulfil your [obligations](#obligations) as a worker, your boss can't fire you for being long-term ill. Let people talk, and look after yourself.

Alternatively just the super short:

> People might, but they'd be wrong. If you're ill and can't work, then you need time  to recover---as would anyone else in those circumstances. So let people talk, and look after yourself.

... could also work?

Reviewer: What about:

> They might think that, but they're wrong and it couldn't be any further from the truth. Some people lack empathy in these situations, and they just may not know how to interact in these situations. This can, and often happens due to cultural and background differences. The reality is, if you're ill and can't work, then you need time to recover---as would anyone else in those circumstances.

I find myself wanting to call out the people that makes these statements, maybe this is too harsh though?

Author: Yes that's fine! The only thing I'd suggest to leave out would be the "cultural and background difference" which might be totally true but maybe not essential for us to flag as part of this guide. I'll update the text with this :ok_hand:

### Can my doctor say I'm not allowed to work?

They could try, but it wouldn't have any legal basis. 

If you'd ask your physiotherapist: 'Am I allowed to work?', they're unlikely to answer yes or no. People work in healthcare to treat patients, not to give you permission to do one thing or another. 

> More likely your healthcare provider will give you personal advice on what's best for your treatment, and how (not) following that advice could affect your treatment. As a patient, it's more helpful to ask your healthcare provider what you can best do and avoid, given the specific treatment you're undergoing. 

Reviewer: hrmmm, I think this might actually need a section as previous. The goal previously was to refer to how health care providers only provide advice, not permission.

A doctor would generally not say "You are not allowed to work" ever. The thing is, many people ask the doctor the inverse "Am I allowed to work?", and the doctor is under no obligation to say yes or no specifically (that would be permission), they only offer advice "I would recommend against/for it" which is a very important legal distinction.

Author: Will try a rephrase

Author: Rephrase to the following, does that sound better?

> You might feel you need to ask your doctor: 'Am I allowed to work?'. However, it's not for a doctor to give or refuse *permission* to work like that to their patients. 
>
> What doctors, and any other healthcare provider, can do is give you personal *advice* on what's best for your treatment. For example, they might say: 'I would recommend you take at least 3 weeks rest to recover', and state how (not) following their advice could affect your treatment. Hence as a patient, it's more helpful to ask your healthcare provider what sort of activities you can best do and avoid, and for how long, given the specific treatment you're undergoing.

Reviewer: Ooooo yes, that's a lot more on point!

### How can I be 30% occupationally impaired (*arbeidsongeschikt*)? 

The extent to which you're impaired can vary depending on what specific illness you have and the expected prognosis. For example, you may have suffered an acquired brain injury (such as a stroke) which leaves you still able to work, but at a reduced capacity.

### My manager keeps giving me random medical advice. What should I do?

In general, your manager shouldn't have medical details of your illness.

From a social perspective, maybe they're trying to be overly helpful? If the advice is unwelcome, you can tell them that you appreciate that they're trying to help, but that it's not helping you right now. If that doesn't resolve the situation, then you can escalate matter internally, for example by speaking to HR.

### Can my boss or line manager ask about my diagnosis? 

No. Really no. 

They can ask 'When will you come back?', or 'What work will you be able to perform?'. But anything related to what illness you have, a specific diagnosis, or medical information, is a hard no.

> In some cases, your employer may request evidence from your healthcare provider. (Some companies already ask for a doctor's note if you've been ill for just two days!) However, any such evidence shouldn't ever contain any medical information. Instead, it should only relate to the advice your healthcare provider has given you about how certain activities could affect your recovery. 

Reviewer: I'm not sure this is true and/or legal. I have this vibe that if a company wants a "doctors note", that they actually have to go to their company doctor and get them to get the information etc. I will do some research and come back, but better to leave this out unless you've got a source.

Author: Ah I think I was basing this on some information from the Disputes section, that the employer could in that case ask for evidence, and then I simply assumed that this would transfer to situations other than the UWV dispute as well -- but indeed can't make such assumptions when it comes to the law :sweat_smile: So I'll remove this final paragraph for now, and if we find additional evidence can put something back in

However, your manager can share information insofar as it's relevant in the context of performing work duties. For example, it can be useful for your coworkers to know which tasks you're picking up right now.

Information about where you are in your reintegration (such as how many hours you're building up), are less relevant though. Discuss with your manager what you're comfortable sharing.

### My GP and my company doctor disagree. Who's right? 

Your company doctor, GP, and any specialists you might be seeing are all heathcare providers. In theory, they should all have your well-being and recovery at heart. (But note that the company doctor is paid by your employer.) 

However, only the company doctor's advice forms the direct input to your reintegration plan, which ultimately you and your employer should agree upon. You can choose to provide your company doctor with any relevant information from your GP or specialist doctor, so that the company doctor can take this into account in formulating their advice. (You aren't obliged to share this medical information, but you can if it's helpful.)

> If you're concerned about the advice your company doctor is giving you, then you're fully entitled to a second opinion from an alternative company doctor -- at the company's expense.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your company doctor, GP, and any specialists you might be seeing are all heathcare providers. In theory, they should all have your well-being and recovery at heart.

However, only the company doctor's advice forms the direct input to your plan of action, which ultimately you and your employer should agree upon. Your company doctor can ask for additional information from your other healthcare providers, however this needs to be under strict written consent from you, the patient. The information should always be sent between the health care providers (there is a formal channel for this), and the patient shouldn't be requested to gather this information directly.

If you're concerned about the advice your company doctor is giving you, then you're fully entitled to a second opinion from an alternative company doctor -- at the company's expense.
```

Removed a part, but also I think this needs some re-working. The company doctor is allowed to ask for information form your health care providers directly, but only with written consent. Infact, a company doctor should never ask the individual to give them the information from their GP. This also applies to physio's, occupational therapists etc.

It happens all too often that the bedrijfsarts is lazy and asks the patient to get them the information, but they have a formal channel ☝️.

### I disagree with my company doctor's advice. What should I do? 

> You can get a second opinion fron an alternative company doctor. And the employer will have to pay for it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can get a second opinion fron an alternative company doctor. The employer is required to pay for it.
```

I've been told the request also needs to go through the company doctor oddly enough. Thinking whether this is actually needed to be included though 🤔
